DOC-5450: Corda 4.12 upgrade guide (#2140)
corda/corda-docs-portal: content/en/platform/corda/4.12/enterprise/upgrade-guide.md

The External Verifier is an external process started by Corda 4.12, running Kotlin 1.2 (with Java 17). This enables Corda 4.12 to run independently of Java 8. Whenever Corda 4.12 detects an old contract version, it externally verifies this contract within the External Verifier process.

When upgrading to Corda 4.12, the old contract CorDapp JAR is preserved and relocated to a new directory named `legacy-contracts`. This directory is essential as it provides legacy contracts for Corda 4.12 nodes to maintain backward compatibility, as required by the External Verifier.

To ensure compatibility of all existing transactions in the node’s backchain with the External Verifier, and consequently with Corda 4.12, a new utility tool has been introduced: the [Transaction Validator Utility]({{< relref "node/operating/tvu/_index.md" >}}). This tool runs the External Verifier on the existing backchain as a sanity check.

{{< figure alt="Corda 4.12 vs Corda 4.11" width=75% height=75% zoom="resources/corda412vs411.png" figcaption="Corda 4.12 vs Corda 4.11">}}

> 

Reviewer: Hi @AnnaK-R3 can you please put this underneath the diagram

> The diagram above outlines the core differences between Corda 4.11 and Corda 4.12, providing a high-level overview of how the external verifier works with the legacy contract code to verify both Corda 4.11 and Corda 4.12 transactions
> 
> The different colours in the diagram show the elements used in each version. Corda 4.11 stays as it is, however, some elements from Corda 4.11 are carried over to Corda 4.12, the 4.11 Contract CorDapp is loaded when the 4.12 node starts which allows a Corda 4.12 Node to send transactions to a Corda 4.11 Node, the 4.11 Contract code (shown in pink) is sent in the transactions as well as the 4.12 Contract code (shown in green), the 4.11 node then discards the new 4.12 Contract Code.
> 
> The Corda 4.11 Transaction Verifier has also been preserved in an external process to allow Corda 4.11 transactions to be verified by Corda 4.12.

> 

Author: Added

## Upgrade scenarios

This section describes three possible upgrade paths to a network operating on Corda 4.12. In these scenarios a network is a collection of Corda nodes that are all running the same CorDapp.

All scenarios involving the upgrade of existing node versions from a previous version of Corda 4.x to Corda 4.12 assume the existence of 4.11 (or earlier) transactions in the node’s backchain.

### Upgrading selected network nodes to 4.12

In this scenario, you have a mixed network where only selected nodes are upgraded to Corda 4.12, while others remain on previous versions of Corda 4.x. This scenario requires you to perform the following actions:
* Upgrade any existing CorDapps to run on Java 17 and Kotlin 1.9.
* Keep a copy of the old CorDapp contract JAR file in the new `legacy-contracts` folder placed inside all upgraded 4.12 nodes.

Any future Corda 4.12 nodes added to the network will also require the `legacy-contracts` folder, unless all nodes have been updated by that time. In the latter case, you are adding new Corda 4.12 nodes to a non-mixed network and this requirement is unnecessary.

### Upgrading all network nodes to 4.12

> In this scenario, you are creating a non-mixed network composed solely of nodes operating on Corda 4.12. Transactions occurring within this newly-upgraded network have only the 4.12 contract component group and therefore, you do not need the `legacy-contracts` folder. This is because nodes trust existing old contract attachments if the new CorDapp locally installed on the node is signed by the same key. However, it is still important that you keep a copy of the old contract JAR for reference.

Reviewer 2: I think this sentence can be removed. Its talking about how we trust old attachments. Its more an implementation detail.

> In this scenario, you are creating a non-mixed network composed solely of nodes operating on Corda 4.12. Transactions occurring within this newly-upgraded network have only the 4.12 contract component group and therefore, you do not need the `legacy-contracts` folder. This is because nodes trust existing old contract attachments if the new CorDapp locally installed on the node is signed by the same key. However, it is still important that you keep a copy of the old contract JAR for reference.

Author: Removed

#### Contract versioning

When Corda 4.12 starts, it loads the CorDapp contract JAR. For version 4.12, the contract version must be higher than the contract version in the `legacy-contracts` JAR file. Therefore, you must increment the contract version by at least one.

#### CorDapp minimum platform version

The new CorDapp should inherit the same minimum platform version as Corda 4.12, which is 140. This is not 14, to account for minor updates to Corda 4.11.

#### CorDapp signing

Upon startup, a node verifies the signing key for the CorDapps it uses, preventing unwanted code from being executed. In Corda 4.12, nodes having both new and legacy versions of a contract CorDapp must have the same signing keys, otherwise the node will fail to start.

### Add the legacy contracts folder to mixed networks

When operating a network with nodes running different versions of Corda, you must store the old CorDapp contract JAR files in the Corda 4.12 node directory (see [Legacy contracts]({{< relref "#legacy-contracts" >}})). This step is not required if all nodes in your network are being upgraded to Corda 4.12.

> However, in both scenarios, you must keep a copy of the old CorDapp contracts JAR file. This file may be required if new Corda 4.12 nodes are introduced into a network containing nodes that have previously been upgraded. For steps describing adding a new node to an existing network of Corda 4.12 containing previously upgraded nodes, see [Adding new 4.12 nodes]({{< relref "#adding-new-412-nodes" >}}).

Reviewer 2: Yes

#### Legacy contracts

Corda 4.12 introduces the concept of legacy contracts, a new `legacy-contracts` folder required when operating a network where not all nodes are running Corda 4.12.

{{< note >}}
If you are not using a mixed network, you do not need the `legacy-contracts` folder.
{{< /note >}}

This folder contains old CorDapp contract JAR files required by the External Verifier to verify old contract attachments in new transactions. The following is an example folder structure of how to set up the node folder to include the `legacy-contracts` folder.

Before upgrade:
```
.
├── certificates
├── corda-4.11.jar
├── cordapps
│   ├── config
│   ├── corda-finance-contracts-4.11.jar
│   └── corda-finance-workflows-4.11.jar
├── drivers
└── node.conf
After upgrade
```

After upgrade:
```
.
├── certificates
├── corda-4.12.jar
├── cordapps
│   ├── config
│   ├── corda-finance-contracts-4.12.jar
│   └── corda-finance-workflows-4.12.jar
├── drivers
├── legacy-contracts
│   └── corda-finance-contracts-4.11.jar
└── node.conf
```

> To ensure compatibility, you must keep the legacy contracts. When a node operating on a prior version of Corda 4.x wants to transact with a Corda 4.12 node, the 4.12 node identifies an old contract version attached to the transaction. To verify this old contract, Corda 4.12 initiates the External Verifier, which starts a new external process running Kotlin 1.2. This process facilitates transaction containing, for example, a Corda 4.11 contract to be verified on a Corda 4.12 node.

Author: Updated

Similarly, when a 4.12 node creates a transaction, it adds a 4.12 contract into a new component group of the transaction, reserving the existing component group for the 4.11 contract. Consequently, when a 4.11 contract gets attached to the transaction, it ends up with two sets of contract attachments (JARs): the legacy one and the new 4.12 contract. If this transaction is received by a node not running Corda 4.12, the node lacks awareness of the new component group. It disregards the 4.12 contract and proceeds to verify the legacy contract instead, which is then stored in the database.

## Starting 4.12 nodes

> 1. Run the database migration scripts.

Reviewer: Do we need link for this or something more supportive (just in case someone has forgot)?

Reviewer: yes that is correct

2. Start your node in the usual way:

   ```
   java -jar corda-4.12.jar -f node.conf
   ```

## Adding new 4.12 nodes

If you want to add another Corda 4.12 node into your network post-upgrade, the specific steps vary depending on the state of your network.

### Adding new 4.12 nodes to a mixed network

If you are operating a mixed network, then the process for adding a new Corda 4.12 node is relatively straightforward.

1. Set up the node folder structure same as other Corda 4.12 nodes.
2. Add the `legacy-contracts` folder and associated files to the node folder.

   ```
   .
   ├── certificates
   ├── corda-4.12.jar
   ├── cordapps
   │   ├── config
   │   ├── corda-finance-contracts-4.12.jar
   │   └── corda-finance-workflows-4.12.jar
   ├── drivers
   ├── legacy-contracts
   │   └── corda-finance-contracts-4.11.jar
   └── node.conf
   ```

3. Register the node to the network and proceed to operate it as normal.

### Adding new 4.12 nodes to a non-mixed network

Perform the following steps if you are adding a new Corda 4.12 node to a network that is only running Corda 4.12 nodes, but also contains older Corda 4.x transactions.

{{< note >}}

> In this scenario, you must keep a copy of the old CorDapp contract JAR file.

Reviewer: The wording on this seems a bit off:

In this scenario, you still require a copy of the old CorDapp contract JAR file.

might sound better

{{< /note >}}

1. Set up the node folder structure without the `legacy-contracts` folder.

   ```
   .
   ├── certificates
   ├── corda-4.12.jar
   ├── cordapps
   │   ├── config
   │   ├── corda-finance-contracts-4.12.jar
   │   └── corda-finance-workflows-4.12.jar
   ├── drivers
   └── node.conf
   ```

2. Register and then start the node.

3. Access the Corda node either via RPC client or the standalone shell and upload the old CorDapp contract JAR as an attachment to the node.
   For more information on uploading attachments, see [Working with attachments]({{< relref "get-started/tutorials/supplementary-tutorials/tutorial-attachments.md" >}}).

## Additional release information

In Corda 4.12, the Corda node explorer is no longer included in the release pack. Should you require it, the Corda 4.11 node explorer remains compatible with Corda 4.12 and should be used for Corda 4.12 nodes.

Corda 4.11 versions of the node and flow management plugins are also compatible with Corda 4.12 and you should use them for Corda 4.12 nodes.

## Troubleshooting

### Add-opens

> In Java 17, an application can no longer access an internal Java method due to the new module system. If a package is not opened, access will be denied. You can circumvent this strong encapsulation by either:

Reviewer: I think this sounds better:

Since upgrading Corda to Java 17, it is important to keep in mind that any CorDapp will no longer have access to internal Java Classes due to the new strong Encapsulation module system introduced in Java 11.

If your CorDapp still requires access to any internal Java classes you can open the package either by:

The Corda 4.11 transaction verifier has also been preserved in an external process to allow Corda 4.11 transactions to be verified by Corda 4.12.

{{< figure alt="Corda 4.12 vs Corda 4.11" width=75% height=75% zoom="resources/corda412vs411.png" figcaption="Corda 4.12 vs Corda 4.11">}}

## Upgrade scenarios

This section describes three possible upgrade paths to a network operating on Corda 4.12. In these scenarios a network is a collection of Corda nodes that are all running the same CorDapp.

All scenarios involving the upgrade of existing node versions from a previous version of Corda 4.x to Corda 4.12 assume the existence of 4.11 (or earlier) transactions in the node’s backchain.

### Upgrading selected network nodes to 4.12

In this scenario, you have a mixed network where only selected nodes are upgraded to Corda 4.12, while others remain on previous versions of Corda 4.x. This scenario requires you to perform the following actions:

> * Upgrade any existing CorDapps to run on Java 17 and Kotlin 1.9.

Author: Changed to ol.

The example use case in this guide validates the transactions without any additional options.

1. Drain the node.
   You must perform this step so there are no in-flight transactions when the node is stopped. Not draining the node could lead to these transactions not being checked by TVU, potentially causing issues later on.
3. Stop the node.
4. Place the TVU JAR into the root folder of the Corda 4.11 node.
5. Run TVU:
   ```
   $ java -jar corda-tools-transaction-validator-4.12-RC01.jar
   Starting
   Total Transactions: 41
   Waiting for all transactions to be processed...
   Success, All transactions processed.
   Total time taken: 3943ms
   ```

### Upgrade 4.11 CorDapps

You must update all custom CorDapps being upgraded that are running on Corda 4.11 nodes so they use Java 17 and Kotlin 1.9. For steps on updating Cordapps, see [Upgrading a CorDapp to Corda Enterprise Edition 4.12]({{< relref "app-upgrade-notes-enterprise.md" >}}).

#### Flow versioning
You must annotate any flow that initiates other flows with the `@InitiatingFlow` annotation, which is defined as:

```
annotation class InitiatingFlow(val version: Int = 1)
```

> The version property, which defaults to 1, specifies the flow’s version. You must increment this integer value whenever a flow release includes changes that are not backwards compatible. However, in this case, the flow version must stay the same to ensure backward compatibility with the flows running on previous Corda versions. However, even though in this case you are not incrementing the flow version, you must always increment the new 4.12 contract version, see [Contract versioning]({{< relref "#contract-versioning" >}}).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The version property, which defaults to 1, specifies the flow’s version. You must increment this integer value whenever a flow release includes changes that are not backwards compatible. However, in this case, the flow version must stay the same to ensure backward compatibility with the flows running on previous Corda versions. However, even though in this case you are not incrementing the flow version, you must always increment the new 4.12 contract version; see [Contract versioning]({{< relref "#contract-versioning" >}}).
```

#### Contract versioning

When Corda 4.12 starts, it loads the CorDapp contract JAR. For version 4.12, the contract version must be higher than the contract version in the `legacy-contracts` JAR file. Therefore, you must increment the contract version by at least one.

#### CorDapp minimum platform version

The new CorDapp should inherit the same minimum platform version as Corda 4.12, which is 140. This is not 14, to account for minor updates to Corda 4.11.

#### CorDapp signing

> Upon startup, a node verifies the signing key for the CorDapps it uses, preventing unwanted code from being executed. In Corda 4.12, nodes having both new and legacy versions of a contract CorDapp must have the same signing keys, otherwise the node will fail to start.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Upon startup, a node verifies the signing key for the CorDapps it uses, preventing unwanted code from being executed. In Corda 4.12, nodes having both new and legacy versions of a contract CorDapp must have the same signing keys; otherwise the node will fail to start.
```

### Add the legacy contracts folder to mixed networks

When operating a network with nodes running different versions of Corda, you must store the old CorDapp contract JAR files in the Corda 4.12 node directory (see [Legacy contracts]({{< relref "#legacy-contracts" >}})). This step is not required if all nodes in your network are being upgraded to Corda 4.12.

However, in both scenarios, you must keep a copy of the old CorDapp contracts JAR file. This file may be required if new Corda 4.12 nodes are introduced into a network containing nodes that have previously been upgraded. For steps describing adding a new node to an existing network of Corda 4.12 containing previously upgraded nodes, see [Adding new 4.12 nodes]({{< relref "#adding-new-412-nodes" >}}).

#### Legacy contracts

> Corda 4.12 introduces the concept of legacy contracts, a new `legacy-contracts` folder required when operating a network where not all nodes are running Corda 4.12.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Corda 4.12 introduces the concept of *legacy contracts*. A new `legacy-contracts` folder is required when operating a network where not all nodes are running Corda 4.12.
```

{{< note >}}
If you are not using a mixed network, you do not need the `legacy-contracts` folder.
{{< /note >}}

This folder contains old CorDapp contract JAR files required by the external verifier process to verify old contract attachments in new transactions. The following is an example folder structure of how to set up the node folder to include the `legacy-contracts` folder.

Before upgrade:
```
.
├── certificates
├── corda-4.11.jar
├── cordapps
│   ├── config
│   ├── corda-finance-contracts-4.11.jar
│   └── corda-finance-workflows-4.11.jar
├── drivers
└── node.conf
After upgrade
```

After upgrade:
```
.
├── certificates
├── corda-4.12.jar
├── cordapps
│   ├── config
│   ├── corda-finance-contracts-4.12.jar
│   └── corda-finance-workflows-4.12.jar
├── drivers
├── legacy-contracts
│   └── corda-finance-contracts-4.11.jar
└── node.conf
```

> To ensure compatibility, you must keep the legacy contracts. When a node operating on a prior version of Corda 4.x wants to transact with a Corda 4.12 node, the 4.12 node identifies an old contract version attached to the transaction. To verify this old contract, Corda 4.12 initiates the external verifier process, which starts a new external process running Kotlin 1.2. Making use of the external verifier process is the way in which a 4.12 node can verify transactions from 4.11 or earlier nodes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To ensure compatibility, you must keep the legacy contracts. When a node operating on a prior version of Corda 4.x wants to transact with a Corda 4.12 node, the 4.12 node identifies an old contract version attached to the transaction. To verify this old contract, Corda 4.12 initiates the external verifier process, which starts a new external process running Kotlin 1.2. Making use of the external verifier process is how a 4.12 node can verify transactions from 4.11 or earlier nodes.
```
